---
title: A New Medium for Your Messages
description: How (and why) did COMPOST become a dweb-native magazine? An update and
  reflection about our sister project, Distributed.Press
authors:
- 05c5963c-8bf7-40ca-ab16-e9199fa72ff2
- 893ed763-6e51-47e5-9f1d-1ef9c3e2789b
image:
  path: public/ixnri0bwqf4mytq0id5lplm3yqia/Compost_Issue03_Assets-DistributedPress.jpg
  description: Distributed Press workmark written in black Gothic text on blue.
show_biography: false
license: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0)
locales: []
draft: false
order: 37
layout: post
uuid: 35a049be-6b8b-4717-b467-97dc1cb62797
liquid: false
usuaries:
- 644
last_modified_at: 2023-05-30 21:24:20.596859720 +00:00
---

<p style="text-align:start">Before the invention of the printing press, publishing was an intricate process that involved painstaking labor, specialized skills, and significant resources. With such a high barrier to entry, the ability to broadcast ideas was concentrated in the hands of the elite few. With the advent of the printing press, however, publishing became dramatically more accessible. The movable type unleashed an intellectual revolution that made it possible for people outside of dominant institutions to spread new stories and dialogues to the masses unlike ever before.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">Now, we are in a strange moment with the internet. Despite all the ways in which it is easier than ever to publish, the gatekeepers of the spaces where we connect and share ideas grow ever more insidiously powerful and imposing. The predominant platforms are heavily surveilled. They are dubiously, or even severely, moderated by opaque algorithms. And they are fundamentally designed to trap people into a cycle of addiction and dependency, capturing attention and data in such a way that prevents them from just being able to leave without having to sacrifice all their posts and networks.</p><p style="text-align:start">There are many of us who want things to be different and better – to circumvent as many of the choke points that prevent people from having meaningful control over the ways they communicate and share digitally. We felt that to do this effectively, we needed to flip the tired script of tech development and “innovation” completely on its head. Namely, to build publication tools not from a place of competitive control and market domination, but from a deep intention to facilitate community power, individual agency, and technological interoperability. In other words, to build a new type of digital printing press that democratizes publishing.</p><h2 style="text-align:start" id="origin-story"><strong>Origin Story</strong></h2><p style="text-align:start">Distributed.Press came out of discussions at Decentralized Web (DWeb) Camp in 2019, when we, as co-organizers of the Camp, lamented the fact that we were using Medium, a corporate publishing platform, to publish reflections and updates about the event. Benedict Lau and Udit Vira, members of Hypha Worker Co-op, and mai ishikawa sutton, all found each other through our respective involvement with community networks in Toronto and Oakland. In late 2019, we began meeting weekly to discuss what building meaningful alternatives might look like.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">The first thing we did was come up with a shared set of values (://distributed.press/values/) that would guide this project. We did this before anything else to lay a groundwork of trust built on shared purpose. They include practicing solidarity, equity, and accountability throughout our work, as well as to stand for inclusion, sustainability, and the commons.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">We knew that we wanted to build a publishing tool for the decentralized web, but we had no idea how we should go about it. We didn’t want to replicate something that did something similar or build something that no one felt was needed or wanted. The three of us didn’t want to assume we had the answers. So we decided to interview people and ask them. In 2020, as the pandemic took hold around the world, we reached out and talked to people around the world who worked on DWeb projects, digital publishing, and some intersection of these areas.</p><p style="text-align:start">The general consensus from those interviews was that Yes, we should go ahead with this…but it must strive to do two things:&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">1) Enable people to publish to not only one or two DWeb endpoints, but have the tool compatible and interoperable with any number of protocols that allow the storage and retrieval of content through distributed means.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">2) Collaborate with values-aligned projects as much as possible, in order to integrate differing approaches to decentralized publishing and to build tools that communities would actually want to use. Key to this was to test the tools with people who already publish their works online.</p><p style="text-align:start">And that was how we came up with Distributed.Press and COMPOST – the former would be a project to build beginner-friendly, open source publishing tools for the World Wide Web and DWeb, and the latter would be a publication that would be a creative lab and testing ground for people to try out the technologies we were building. As sister projects, they would complement and influence each other as they worked in tandem towards a healthier, more distributed digital commons.&nbsp;</p><h1 style="text-align:start" id="digital-commoning-is-a-verb"><strong>Digital Commoning is a Verb</strong></h1><p style="text-align:start">What’s special about this issue of COMPOST is that we used the Sutty Content Management System (CMS) to publish it. A CMS is like Wordpress or Medium, a platform that enables you to publish websites on the web. The Sutty CMS was developed by Sutty (://sutty.nl) ), a worker co-operative based in Buenos Aires that works closely with activists, collectives, and human rights organizations across Latin America. Their CMS enables people to publish sites using templates and customizable graphical user interfaces for authoring posts.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">And how did Hypha and Sutty find each other? It was thanks to our first issue of COMPOST! When Sutty came across they reached out wanting to collaborate. They told us that they had a platform that generated static Jekyll websites, and that they were interested in working with us to integrate distributed publishing on their CMS.</p><p style="text-align:start">Fast forward two years later – Hypha and Sutty are now working closely together to create a beginner-friendly way for anyone to publish their websites to the DWeb. Given that we each work in different languages (English and Spanish, respectively) and come from different work cultures, it did take some time for us to get into the swing of things. But it’s been more than worthwhile – it’s been incredibly fun and rewarding to work alongside each other to envision and manifest the tools we want.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">We think that for the web to be meaningfully decentralized, there must also be a concerted effort to have the tools we built create by and for people who are not only from English-speaking, “global North” countries. As a Spanish-first platform, integrating Distributed.Press into Sutty has been an important step towards this goal. We aim to work with partners from other regions and languages to develop DWeb publishing tools that meet a wide-range of needs and desires.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">But for now, our collaboration with Sutty, and this issue of COMPOST, is made possible through a partnership with Filecoin Foundation for the Decentralized Web (FFDW - https://ffdweb.org/). FFDW has become a key supporter of projects across the DWeb ecosystem. Instead of merely providing funding to projects, they work to have their project partners collaborate and share information and resources.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">We believe in building free and open network technologies through shared principles (https://getdweb.net/principles) . Our collaboration with Sutty and FFDW embodies the kind of close, interorganizational support that’s necessary to build and stewards the digital commons. By grounding the development of this project in a culture and practice of solidarity, cooperation, and trust, we can ensure that the process results in technologies that reflect these values. COMPOST in particular is a way for us to embed our values of play, curiosity, and fair labor into the technologies that we build.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start"></p><blockquote class="blockquote"><p style="text-align:start"><em>Our goals are to improve content discoverability and archiving, fight political censorship and misinformation, while supporting offline distribution, new monetization channels, and fair compensation for those who publish their works to the web. We aim to do this by building publishing tools that put control over the means of publication in the hands of organizers, artists, journalists, and those in offline communities.&nbsp;</em></p></blockquote><p style="text-align:start"></p><h1 style="text-align:start" id="distributing-power-with-distributed-publishing"><strong>Distributing Power with Distributed Publishing</strong></h1><p style="text-align:start">Now we’re going to get a bit more technical in this section.</p><p style="text-align:start">Last month we [released a new version of Distributed Press](https://hypha.coop/dripline/distributed-press-v1-announcement/) which was rewritten from scratch to make it easier for people to deploy and to grow our set of supported protocols. We’ve updated our protocol support to make use of the latest version of IPFS and Holepunch (formerly Hypercore Protocol, formerly Dat). This has dramatically improved publish times and the overall speed at which people can load websites from the network. We have also added a new built in DNS server (the thing that resolves websites like example.com to a computer on the internet you can connect to) which lets publishers have nice URLs by pointing their website at Distributed.Press. We have also streamlined the deployment of Distributed.Press so that people wanting to set up their own instance can make use of any computer they have access to and run our Ansible scripts to set everything up.</p><p style="text-align:start">Our next milestone will involve bringing a new social layer to the distributed web by combining the ActivityPub protocol behind services like Mastodon and PeerTube with peer-to-peer static site publishing. As before, we’re planning on using what’s existing out there and connecting to existing communities.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">ActivityPub and the Fediverse is widespread and there are already large communities of people publishing in decentralized networks across many different implementations. We’ll be enabling web sites published with Distributed.Press to participate by exposing their data in a format that is compatible with other Fediverse instances.&nbsp; We will also be enabling website publishers to receive comments on their posts from the Fediverse and to create responses to each other’s posts through the same mechanism. Longer term, we hope to experiment with not needing a server at all with Fediverse clients that can read people’s data directly from peer-to-peer protocols and send data to each other without needing an always-online server as an intermediary.</p><p style="text-align:start">We’re also actively working on integrating new peer-to-peer protocols such as BitTorrent. BitTorrent clients have been around for many years, and soon, websites published with Distributed.Press will be available to download there too. We’re also exploring other protocols like Earthstar, which are using more modern learnings for how to transmit p2p data quickly and safely. Each protocol gives us more reach and more flexibility with different tradeoffs that work best in different scenarios. You can read more about the differences on our [P2P Primer series](<a href="https://hypha.coop/dripline/p2p-primer-part-1/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">://hypha.coop/dripline/p2p-primer-part-1/</a>). By making them available in a unified but modular interface, we can leave more room for communities to experiment with what works best for them.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">Overall Distributed Press is more powerful and flexible than ever and is ready for people to experiment with and deploy for their own communities.</p><h1 style="text-align:start" id="publish-to-the-dweb!"><strong>Publish to the DWeb!</strong></h1><p style="text-align:start">So want to try publishing to the DWeb?? Here are a few ways to get started now:</p><p style="text-align:start"><strong>Sutty CMS</strong> – The beginner-friendly way to publish to the DWeb. All you need to do is start a website on Sutty and turn on “Publish to DWeb” toggle in configurations. Learn how to do that on our documentation page on the World Wide Web: <a href="https://docs.distributed.press/deployment/sutty" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">://docs.distributed.press/deployment/sutty</a></p><p style="text-align:start"><strong>Github Pages</strong> – If you already deploy your site to GitHub pages or any other static site hosting service then the GitHub action will allow you to also deploy to the DWeb by adding just a few additional lines of configuration to your code repository. For instructions, check out our docs on the World Wide Web: <a href="https://docs.distributed.press/deployment/github-actions" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">https://docs.distributed.press/deployment/github-actions</a>&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start"><strong>Self-Hosting</strong> – Distributed Press uses Ansible (https://www.ansible.com/) to make setting up your own Distributed Press instance fast and simple. All the instructions are here on our docs page on the World Wide Web: <a href="https://docs.distributed.press/self-hosting" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">https://docs.distributed.press/self-hosting</a></p><h1 style="text-align:start" id="accessing-dwebsites"><strong>Accessing DWebsites</strong></h1><p style="text-align:start">Once you’ve published your site, there’s a few ways for folks to access it. The easiest way is still to use the HTTPS version of the site over the web, but you can now also use standard gateways for IPFS and Holepunch. At Hypha, we’re running an IPFS gateway at <a href="https://hypha-coop.ipns.ipfs.hypha.coop/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">https://hypha-coop.ipns.ipfs.hypha.coop/</a> and a Holepunch gateway at <a href="https://hypha-coop.hyper.hypha.coop/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">https://hypha-coop.hyper.hypha.coop/</a>. However, you can use any gateway for any published website since they all load from the same peer to peer networks. You can even set up gateways to run on your personal computer and browse sites without needing the internet.&nbsp;</p><p style="text-align:start">You can also access sites via web browsers that have first class support for peer to peer protocols. For IPFS loading there is the [Brave Browser](<a href="https://brave.com/ipfs-support/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">https://brave.com/ipfs-support/</a>) and [Opera](<a href="https://blogs.opera.com/tips-and-tricks/2021/02/opera-crypto-files-for-keeps-ipfs-unstoppable-domains/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">https://blogs.opera.com/tips-and-tricks/2021/02/opera-crypto-files-for-keeps-ipfs-unstoppable-domains/</a>). And for a mix of all our supported protocols there is the [Agregore Browser](://agregore.mauve.moe) which in addition to loading many protocols also enables peer-to-peer web applications to publish back to the network without a third party server or an internet connection.</p><p style="text-align:start">*~*~*~*</p><p style="text-align:start"><strong>We would love feedback!</strong> As we continue to build Distributed Press, please tell us how our tools are working or not working as you hope or expect.</p><p style="text-align:start"><strong>*** <a href="https://github.com/hyphacoop/api.distributed.press/issues/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">File a bug on our Github issue tracker</a>. ***</strong></p><p style="text-align:start">Thank you so much for supporting our projects and helping us make DWeb publishing better for everyone!</p><p style="text-align:start"><em>Distributed.Press is made possible through generous support from <a href="https://ffdweb.org/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">Filecoin Foundation for the Decentralized Web</a>, Grant for the Web, and our supporters on <a href="https://opencollective.com/distributed-press" rel="noopener" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin">Open Collective</a>.&nbsp;</em></p>